# Thursday April 28 Week 12-2
## One and Two Tailed Tests: 

### One Tailed Tests
- A test of any statistical hypothesis where the alternative is one-sided is called a one-tailed test. Consider the following: 
    - $H_0: \theta = \theta_0$ and $H_1: \theta > \theta_0$ is a right-tailed test
    - $H_1: \theta = \theta_0$ and $H_1: \theta < \theta_0$ is a left-tailed test


### Two Tailed Tests
- A test where the alternative hypothesis $H_1$ is two-sided is called a two-tailed test. Consider the following: 
    - $H_0: \theta = \theta_0$ and $H_1: \theta \neq \theta_0$ 



### Example 1 
- Someone claims that the average fat content does not exceed $1.5$ per serving. State the null and alternative hypothesis. 

**Solution**
- $H_0: \ \mu = 1.5$ 
- $H_1: \ \mu > 1.5$
- The test statistic is $\bar{X}$, and the critical region is the right tail of $\bar{X}$
- Note that for values $\leq 1.5$ we still fail to reject the null hypothesis.

### Example 2
- Real estate agent claims that 60% of all private residences are 3 bed. State the null and alternative hypothesis. 

**Solution**
- $H_0: \ p = 0.6$
- $H_1: \ p \neq 0.6$
- The test statistic is $\hat{P}$, and the critical region is the two tails of $\hat{P}$
- So if the test statistic is significantly different from $p=0.6$ we reject the null hypothesis.

## P-Values in Hypothesis Testing
- P-value: Given the null $H_0$ is true, the p-value is the probability of observing a test statistic as or more extreme than what we actually observed. 

**Interpretation**
Given a significance level $\alpha$
- $ p \leq \alpha$ suggests strong evidence against $H_0$: the probability of observing our test statistic given that the null is true, is low, so we should reject the null hypothesis.
- A large p-value indicates weak evidence against $H_0$, suggesting we fail to reject the null. 

**Usage** 
- A p-value quantifies the strength of evidence against $H_0$
- It is used to make an informed decision on whether to reject $H_0$ or not.



## Hypothesis Testing for the Mean (two-tailed test)
- Hypothesis Statement: $H_0: \mu = \mu_0$ and $H_1: \mu \neq \mu_0$
- Given some data:
    - Sample: $x_1, x_2, ..., x_n$
    - Known variance: $\sigma^2$
    - Type I error proability: $\alpha$
- **Test statistic**: given the CLT holds is the z score with $\mu = \mu_0$ (since we assume the null to be true):
$$Z = \frac{\bar{X} - \mu_0}{\sigma/\sqrt{n}}$$
- **Non-rejection region** for $H_0$, i.e. our results are not unexpected: 
$$ P\left(-z_{\alpha/2} \leq \frac{\bar{X} - \mu_0}{\sigma/\sqrt{n}} \leq z_{\alpha/2}\right) = 1 - \alpha$$
- **Decision Rule**: if our calculated $z$ is not within the interval $[-z_{\alpha/2}, z_{\alpha/2}]$ we reject $H_0$. 


## Calculating the P-Value
$$ P = P\left(\left|\frac{\bar{X} - \mu_0}{\sigma/\sqrt{n}}\right| \geq \left|x\right|\right) = P\left(Z \geq \left|z\right|\right) = P(Z \leq -\left|z\right|) + P(Z \geq \left|z\right|) = 2 P(Z \geq \left|z\right|)$$ 
- So the P-value ris the probability that the Z statistic is more extreme than the observed z value (this works for single and double tailed tests).
- A low P-value (i.e. one that is less than our significance level $\alpha$) suggests that the observed result is highly unlikely **given** that the null is true—which is why we reject the null hypothesis.
- A high P-value indicates that the observed result is **likelye under H_0**, so there is not enoug hevidence to reject $H_0$. 


### Example 3
- $n=100$, $\bar{x} = 71.8$, $\sigma = 8.9$. 
- Does this seems to indicate that the mean of the population is greater than 70 years with a 0.05 level of significance?
**Solution**
1. Null Hypothesis: $H_0: \mu = 70$
2. Alternative Hypothesis: $H_1: \mu > 70$ (one-tailed, right-tailed test)
3. Significance level: $\alpha = 0.05$
4. Critical region $z_{\alpha =0.05} > 1.645$ 
5. Test statistic: $Z = \frac{71.8 - 70}{8.9/\sqrt{100}} = 2.02$
6. Decisions: Reject $H_0$ since $2.02 > 1.645$. moreover, the p-value for $z=2.02$ is $P(Z>2.02) = 0.0217$, indicating strong evidence in favor of $H_1$ at the 0.05 significance level ($p < \alpha$)
    - Note that in this case we can make conclusions based on the z-values or the p-value + significance level. 
    - Since we were working with a right-tailed test, a z-value greater than the critical value indicates that we reject the null hypothesis.
    - We could also just compare the p-value to the significance level, and since the p-value is less than the significance level, we reject the null hypothesis.